repeatable item docs (#521)
replicatedhq/kots.io: content/reference/v1beta1/repeatable.md

---
date: 2021-07-13
linktitle: "Repeatable"
title: Repeatable Config
description: "Repeatable config generates copies of kubernetes manifest items."
weight: 9
---

## Repeatable Items

A repeatable config item copies a YAML array entry or YAML document for as many values as are provided. Any number of values can be added to a repeatable item to generate additional copies.

**Repeatable Items presently only work for text and textarea types**

To make an item repeatable, set `repeatable` to true
```yaml

>     - name: ports

Author: I did this to match the Config page, where yaml snippets from the middle of a file are indented.  Since this is every case on the page I think it's reasonable to eliminate the indentation, but we should consider that it will look differently than the Config page.

Let me know what is preferable and I'll adjust it

>     - name: ports

Reviewer: I figured maybe that was the reason, but then I noticed that some complete manifests are indented too, like in the examples at the bottom of the page. I think it's fine/good to indent the snippets from the middle of a file, so let's just fix the complete file indentations.

>     - name: ports

Author: Thanks for catching those at the bottom, totally slipped my radar!  I fixed the indenting on the full yaml manifests if you want to double check.

      items:
      - name: service_ports
        title: Service Ports
        type: text
        repeatable: true
```

Repeatable items do not use the `default` or `value` fields, but instead a `valuesByGroup` field.
`valuesByGroup` should have an entry for the parent Config Group name, with all default `key:value` pairs nested in the group.  1 default entry is required for the repeatable item.
```yaml
    valuesByGroup:
      ports:
        port-default-1: "80"
```

## Template Targets

Repeatable items require at least 1 `template` to be provided.  The `template` defines a YAML target in the manifest to duplicate for each repeatable item.

The entire YAML node at the target will be duplicated, including nested fields.

The `yamlPath` field of the `template` must denote index position for arrays using square brackets.  For example, `spec.ports[0]` to select the first port entry for duplication.  All duplicate YAML will be appended to the final array in the `yamlPath`.

`yamlPath` **must** end with an array.
```yaml
    template:
    - apiVersion: v1
      kind: Service
      name: my-service

>       namespace: my-app

Author: Just the first three.  I've added the following line to "Template Targets": ```Required fields for a template target are `apiVersion`, `kind`, and `name`.```

>       namespace: my-app

Reviewer: So what does specifying the namespace do? And what if I specified another field that isn't required?

>       namespace: my-app

Author: If you specify a namespace, it will only match a manifest with that namespace in the metadata.  For example, if you have `name: my-service` in a `data` namespace as well as in a `app` namespace, this will allow you to target a specific manifest.

>       namespace: my-app

Reviewer: Are there any other fields a vendor can mention here that will have an effect? Since we now note that you have to provide `apiVersion`, `kind`, and `name`, we should mention anything else that can be put here too.

>       namespace: my-app

Author: Templates must have apiVersion, kind, and name.  They may have namespace and yamlPath.  Those are the only available properties today.  The KOTS linter is updated to enforce these rules as well, reducing the chances a vendor makes a mistake.

>       namespace: my-app

Reviewer: `yamlPath` is obviously covered below. After mentioning the three required ones, I would say that you can specify the namespace in order to disambiguate if a yaml document with the same `apiVersion`, `kind`, and `name` exists for multiple namespaces. Just so someone knows that that is an option and why they'd need it. This can resolve too.

>       namespace: my-app

Author: I added a line to explain what namespaces can be used for to clarify :)

>       namespace: my-app

Reviewer: Nice, good to resolve here too.

```yaml
    - port: '{{repl ConfigOption "[[repl .service_ports ]]" | ParseInt }}'
```
This repeatable templating is not compatible with sprig templating functions.  It is designed for inserting repeatable `keys` into the manifest. Repeatable templating **can** be placed inside of Replicated config templating.

## Ordering

Repeatable templates are processed before config template rendering.

Repeatable items are processed in order of the template targets in the Config Spec file.  Effectively, this ordering is from the top of the Config Spec, by Config Group, by Config Item, and then by template target.

```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_ports
        title: Service Ports
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed first
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath: 'spec.ports[0]'
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed second
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath:

>     {...}

Author: I've added some annotation to the ellipses.  The first one is cutting out everything until the next item, and the second one is cutting out everything until the next group.  I agree it looks kinda clunky though, if you have any thoughts on splitting this better I'm all for it.

>     {...}

Reviewer: Yeah, I see my confusion now. Can the first {...} be indented two more spaces so that it aligns with the items, since that's what it is representing? And then maybe say "other items" and "other deployments" or something like that since there could be multiple.

>     {...}

Author: Updated, let me know if this makes more sense

>     {...}

Reviewer: Looking at it now, the only possible concern is that the ordering isn't correct anymore if there are other items concealed by the ellipses. Like the fourth one wouldn't really be fourth if there are other items in `ports`. Sorry for waffling on this one, but maybe we can remove the ellipses because they confuse the ordering a bit. People will probably get that there can be other things in there since that's the point of repeatable stuff.

>     {...}

Author: the real purpose of the ellipses is that repeatable items are required to have the ValuesByGroup property filled in, which would make this example much longer than it needs to be.  The elipses with the note "other item properties" is supposed to denote that the item is abbreviated for space, not that there are other repeatable items present but not listed.  I wouldn't think anybody would assume there are other repeatable items listed inside of the ellipses, since the example is meant to show all of the repeatable items and when they'll be processed.

>     {...}

Reviewer: Ah I'm with you now. You can resolve this one too then.

      - name: other_ports
        title: Other Service Ports
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed third
          kind: Service
          name: my-other-service
          namespace: my-app
    {...}
    - name: deployments
      items:
      - name: deployment-name
        title: Deployment Names
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: apps/v1 #processed fourth
          kind: Deployment
          name: my-deployment
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath:
    {...}
```

## Repeatable Item Example for a YamlPath
**Config spec**
```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_ports
        title: Service Ports
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath: 'spec.ports[0]'
        valuesByGroup:
          ports:
            port-default-1: "80"

>             port-default-2: "443"

Reviewer: Just making sure I understand the basics here… In this example, when the end user is installing the app and has to enter the configuration values, would this present them with two port values by default (80 and 443) and they could click a plus button to add additional ones?

Where does the key name come from? Like in this case you have `port-default-1, and `port-default-2`, but if the end user added a third, what would it be called? I assume it would be generated programmatically.

Author: Correct, from a user perspective they'll see a config page with values 80 and 443 by default (which they should be able to change), and a button to "add another".

Additional values would get generated names, yes.  It's the item name + 6 character short uuid, IE `service_ports-8d7hne`.  These key names can be anything as long as they're unique.

Reviewer: Two questions.
1. So the vendor choose the names for the default ones, but the additional ones will be generated?
2. The end user can remove defaults, right? So the default could be two ports, 80 and 443, but the end user could change it to just one port, for example.

Author: 1.  That is how it works today, yes.
2. The user can remove anything but the last value.  There must always be at least 1 value provided or rendering will break.  There is a 'minimumCount' field to prevent deleting too many values (if the vendor required at least 3 ports, for example), but I'd like to do some more robust testing on that before adding it to the docs.

```
**Template manifest**
```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: my-service
      namespace: my-app
    spec:
      type: NodePort
      ports:
      - port: '{{repl ConfigOption "[[repl .service_ports ]]" | ParseInt }}'
        name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "[[repl .service_ports ]]" }}'
      selector:
        app: repeat_example
        component: my-deployment
```

**After repeatable config processing**
```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: my-service
      namespace: my-app
    spec:
      type: NodePort
      ports:
      - port: '{{repl ConfigOption "port-default-1" | ParseInt }}'

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Author: Never.  The purpose of the function is for the previous step, `{{repl ConfigOptionName "[[repl .service_ports ]]" }}` to work with generated variable names.  The ConfigOptionName wouldn't be known until the customer's config values are provided.

This part of the example is meant to explain what's happening during the multi-step render process.  If that's unclear, I can provide a short explanation.

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Author: I added a note at the top of the yaml example here to explain that this section is all internal to KOTS rendering.  Let me know if I've made it more confusing 😄

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Reviewer: I think I'm at least halfway tracking :) What's confusing to me is that the incremental steps make it look like `ConfigOptionName` just returns whatever it is passed, in which case it doesn't feel necessary. So what I don't totally see yet is the relationship between `ConfigOptionName` and `"[[repl .service_ports]]"`. It sounds like they need to work together, but the incremental thing is throwing me off since it looks like `"[[repl .service_ports]]"` is doing all the work.

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Author: ... somewhere in the dev process this totally became possible and I just missed it.  Originally it required to be inside the repl{{ }} templating.  The following works according to the unit tests.

```yaml
- secret:
     name: 'repl[[ .secretName ]]'
     pod: repl{{ ConfigOption "podName" }}
```

I will update the docs to show this as the primary example instead of using ConfigOptionName.  Thanks for pointing this out!!

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Reviewer: Glad we stumbled upon that together. So what does `ConfigOptionName` get used for then? I don't think it's used in these examples now in light of that change.

Also, do we need to doc the `'repl[[ .secretName ]]'` syntax since we haven't used that before? It seems different than our other `repl` templating because it has the dot.

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Author: `repl[[ .variable ]]` is documented under the Templating section here.  It's only used for repeatable items so I think this is the right place.

I've removed the ConfigOptionName documentation as it's unnecessary.

>         name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "port-default-1" }}'

Reviewer: Cool. You can resolve this one.

    {... next group}
    - name: deployments
      items:
      - name: deployment-name
        title: Deployment Names
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: apps/v1 #processed fourth
          kind: Deployment
          name: my-deployment
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath:
    {... remainder of the Config Spec}
```

## Repeatable Item Example for a YamlPath
**Config spec**
```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_ports
        title: Service Ports
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath: 'spec.ports[0]'
        valuesByGroup:
          ports:
            port-default-1: "80"
            port-default-2: "443"
```
**Template manifest**
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
  namespace: my-app
spec:
  type: NodePort
  ports:
  - port: '{{repl ConfigOption "[[repl .service_ports ]]" | ParseInt }}'
    name: '{{repl ConfigOptionName "[[repl .service_ports ]]" }}'
  selector:
    app: repeat_example
    component: my-deployment
```

> **After repeatable config processing**

Reviewer: After our comments in the other review, I realized the generated names don't make an appearance here; everything comes from the config spec. It would be helpful to flesh out the example more and explain that the user dynamically adds another value, a name is generated, and that gets plugged into the template manifest. Otherwise, it feels like this could all be done without repeatable even being necessary (the template provided all the information, the user didn't change anything).

What if we removed port 443 from the config and just had one default, port 80. Then we describe that the user added a second port, 443. Then we have a generated name (whatever that would be, nginx-xxxx from your demo the other day) that gets plugged in for the resulting manifest. That would help me see the dynamic nature here and better understand why this is necessary and how a user's input is reflected in the result. And then do something similar for the YAML document example too.

What do you think?

Author: Solid idea.  I've updated the full example at the bottom to say port 80 is the shipped default, and port 443 has been added by the end-user.  Let me know your thoughts on the new example.

Reviewer: This can resolve, though I made a couple comments in a different review on this topic.

---
date: 2021-07-13
linktitle: "Repeatable"
title: Repeatable Config
description: "Repeatable config generates copies of kubernetes manifest items."
weight: 9
---

## Repeatable Items

A repeatable config item copies a YAML array entry or YAML document for as many values as are provided. Any number of values can be added to a repeatable item to generate additional copies.

**Repeatable Items presently only work for text and textarea types**

To make an item repeatable, set `repeatable` to true
```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_port
        title: Service Port
        type: text
        repeatable: true
```

Repeatable items do not use the `default` or `value` fields, but instead a `valuesByGroup` field.

> `valuesByGroup` should have an entry for the parent Config Group name, with all default `key:value` pairs nested in the group.  1 default entry is required for the repeatable item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`valuesByGroup` should have an entry for the parent Config Group name, with all default `key:value` pairs nested in the group. At least one default entry is required for the repeatable item.
```

```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_port
        title: Service Port
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed first
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath: 'spec.ports[0]'
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed second
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath:
        {other item properties ...}
      - name: other_ports
        title: Other Service Port
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1 #processed third
          kind: Service
          name: my-other-service
          namespace: my-app
        {other item properties ...}
    - name: deployments
      items:
      - name: deployment-name
        title: Deployment Names
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: apps/v1 #processed fourth
          kind: Deployment
          name: my-deployment
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath:
        {other item properties ...}
```

# Examples

> In this example, the default service port of "80" is included with the release. Port 443 is added as an additional port on the KOTSADM `Config` page, which is stored in the ConfigValues file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these examples, the default service port of "80" is included with the release. Port 443 is added as an additional port on the KOTS Admin Console `Config` page, which is stored in the ConfigValues file.
```
Make the beginning plural because there are two examples. And current style is to write KOTS or KOTS Admin Console rather than kotsadm, except when that name must be used, like in code.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
  namespace: my-app
spec:
  type: NodePort
  ports:
  - port: repl{{ ConfigOption "port-default-1" | ParseInt }}
    name: 'port-default-1'
  - port: repl{{ ConfigOption "service_port-8jdn2bgd" | ParseInt }}
    name: 'service_port-8jdn2bgd'
  selector:
    app: repeat_example
    component: my-deployment
```

**Resulting manifest**
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
  namespace: my-app
spec:
  type: NodePort
  ports:
  - port: 80
    name: port-default-1
  - port: 443
    name: service_port-8jdn2bgd
  selector:
    app: repeat_example
    component: my-deployment
```

## Repeatable Item Example for an Entire Document
**Config spec**
```yaml
    - name: ports
      items:
      - name: service_port
        title: Service Port
        type: text
        repeatable: true
        template:
        - apiVersion: v1
          kind: Service
          name: my-service
          namespace: my-app
          yamlPath: ""
        valuesByGroup:
          ports:
            port-default-1: "80"

>             service_port-8jdn2bgd: "443"

Reviewer: Shouldn't this match the first example and not include `service_port-8jdn2bgd: "443"` here since the vendor wouldn't write that? And then you'd have a Config values section that merges the spec with the user input.

Author: yep, updated one example but not the other, thanks!
